I've worked in emergency medicine for 11 years and I've seen a lot of death yet
I'm so afraid of dying. Any advice on how I can be at peace with dying and mortality?
Well, I don't know if anybody's ever really at peace with that.
I mean, I think what you can take away, read Socrates' Apology. There's two versions of it. There's
there's the Plato's version and there's, what was his name? Aristophanes? There's another version.
I don't think that's right. Anyways, there's two versions of Socrates' Apology. It's very short.
It's only a few pages long, 15 pages or something. Read them both. Why? Well,
because Socrates puts together, puts forward a very interesting proposition and I don't really
know really what to make of it. So I asked my parents once if they could take a drug that would
return them to being 18 physically, but they can take, they had all the wisdom that they'd accrued
over the years. They wouldn't lose that if they would do it. And they didn't say yes right away.
You know, and I don't know if they ever did tell me what they had decided, but it was interesting
to me that they didn't say, they didn't say no right away either, you know, but it's interesting
that they had to think about it because you'd think that if you were offered something approximating
immortality and health, you'd take it. And maybe you would, but, but then here's an alternative
proposition and I don't know. It's not like I'm not trying to maintain myself, you know, if I could
extract out an extra decade or an extra 20 years, keeping myself healthy, that seems like a good
thing. Would I want to live 500 years? That's a long time, man. A thousand years? I don't know.
That's a long time, but the alternative is, you know, truncated existence with death.
And that's also not particularly palatable. And so is there a medicament for mortality?
Well, Socrates, what implicit in Socrates' apology is the following idea. Imagine you
lived your life fully, and that would mean that you, you said what you had to say when you had to
say it, you did what you needed to do when you needed to do it, and you availed yourself of
every opportunity that came your way, right? So you'd exhaust yourself in the service of your life,
let's say. Maybe by the time you were old, you'd have had enough, you know, and you could just
let go. And you know, you do see this with people is that, and we kind of know this even when we
grieve, you know, maybe you have a relative who's 95 and they die and people are sad, but you say,
well, you know, they live the full life and the fuller the life, the less, in some ways, the less
catastrophic the demise appears to be. And so it might be that if you fully exhausted yourself,
that your life would be enough. So I know, you know, people, I said, I mentioned this already,
people who are old and they look back in their life, they're often sorrowful and regretful for
the things they didn't do, you know, the things they left undone, and maybe now can't do, you know,
you could imagine those of you who've been parents, maybe have grown kids now, you think, well,
if you could have children again, would you? And maybe the answer is yes, but another answer is,
well, you know, I had kids already, I already did that. And if you did that, well, maybe that's
enough. You know, we have grandkids now and that's not exactly the same as having kids, it's sort of,
it's kids light, right? And it's wonderful. But you made a joke about that when you were on stage,
you know, you said they have all the advantages of children, grandchildren with none of the
disadvantages and that's a joke, but everybody laughs because everybody gets that and it's great
to have grandchildren and like, would we return to our youth and do it again?
Well, that's a very difficult question to answer, right? Because you just, well, you just don't
have the, you can't tell what you decided unless that option was actually available to you. And
maybe the answer is yes, and maybe the answer is no, because, you know, being there, done that,
onto whatever the next thing is. And so I would say, if you're afraid of death,
take a look at how you're living and see if, if you're all in, and maybe if you're all in enough,
that's good enough. I think that's right. I think that's right. And then I think also,
if you're all in and death visits and you know it's impending, you could say to yourself,
I did everything that I was here to do, at least then you're not going to torture yourself with that
as you're facing death. That's something too.